in the PCA algorithm we take n
dimensional features and reduce them to
some K dimensional feature
representation this number K is a
parameter of the PCA algorithm this
number K is also called the number of
principal components or the number of
principal components that we retain and
in this video I'd like to give you some
guidelines to sort of tell you about how
people tend to think about how to choose
this parameter K for PCA in order to
choose K that is to choose the number of
principal components here are a couple
of useful concepts what PCA tries to do
is it tries to minimize the average
square projection error so it tries to
minimize this quantity which I'm writing
down which is a the difference between
the original data X and the projected
version X aprox I which was defined in
the last video so it tries to minimize
the squared distance between X and this
projection onto that lower dimensional
surface so that's the average squared
projection error also let me define the
total variation in the data to be the
average length squared of these examples
excise so the total variation in the
data is you know the average of my
training set of the length of each of my
training examples and this Allah says on
average how far are my training examples
from the vector from from just being all
zeros so how far is half out on average
on my training examples from the origin
well we're trying to choose K pretty
common rule of thumb for choosing K is
to choose the smallest value so that the
ratio between these is less than 0.01 so
in other words pretty common way to
think about how we choose K is we want
the average square projection error that
is the average distance between X and s
projections divided by you know the
total variation of the data that is how
much the data varies we want this ratio
to be less
let's say 0.01 all to be on less than 1%
would be a which is another way of
thinking about it and the way most
people think about choosing K is rather
than choosing K directly the way most
people talk about it is as what this
number is whether this is 0.01 or some
other number and this is 0.01 another
way to say this to use the language of
PCA is that 99% of the variance is
maintained I don't really want to don't
don't worry about what this phrase
really means technically but this rate
99% of variance retain just means that
this quantity on the left is less than
0.01 and so if you are using PCA and if
you want to tell someone you know how
many your principle components you
retained there'd be more Commons and say
well I chose K so that 99% of the
variance was retained and that's kind of
a useful thing to know it means that you
know the average square projection error
divided by the total variation that was
at most one percent that's kind of an
insightful thing to think about
whereas if you tell someone that well
I've written I had 100 principal
components or K was equal to 100 in
1,000 data is this sort of harder for
people to interpret that so this number
oh point oh one is you know what people
often use other common values will be
0.05 and so to speak 5% and if you do
that then you go and say well 95% of the
variance is retained and you know other
numbers may be in maybe around 90% of
the variance is retained maybe as low as
85% so that 90% would correspond to say
existence you open one Oh
kind of parens 10% and so range of
values Ramiro 1990 $5.99 maybe as low as
85% of the variance retail would be a
fairly typical range of values and maybe
a 95 to 99 it's really the most common
range of values that people use and for
many data sets you'd be surprised in
order to retain 99% of the variance
you can often reduce the dimension of
the data significantly still and still
retain most of the variance because for
most real life data says many features
are just highly correlated and so it
turns out to be possible to compress the
data a lot and still retain you know 99%
of the variance or 95% of the variance
so how do you implement this well here's
one algorithm that you might use we
might start off if you want to choose
the value of K we might start off with K
plus 1 and then we run through PCA you
know so we computed you reduce compute
z1 z2 up to ZM compete all those x1 and
rots and so on up to XM approach so then
we check if 99% of the variance is
retained then we're good and we use K
equals 1 but if it isn't then what we'll
do is we'll next try T equals 2 and then
go again run through this entire
procedure and check you know business
expression satisfied is this less than
0.01 and it's not let me do this again
let's try K equals 3 then try K equals 4
and so on until maybe we get up to K
equals 17 and we find that 99% of the
variance abstain and then we use K
equals 17 right so that's one way to
choose the the choose the value of
choose the smallest value of K so that
99% of the variance is retained but as
you can imagine this this procedure
seems horribly inefficient for triangles
1 K equals 2 we're doing all these
calculations fortunately when you
implement PCA it actually in this inner
step it actually gives us a quantity
that makes it much easier to compute
these things as well specifically when
you're calling SVD to get
these matrices us and D we're calling us
video on the covariance matrix Sigma it
also gives us back this matrix s and
what s is is going to be a square matrix
and n by n matrix in fact that is
diagonal so it's diagonal entries s 1 1
s 2 to s 3 3 down to s n n are going to
be the only nonzero elements of this
matrix and everything off the diagonals
is going to be 0 ok so those big O's not
drawing by that what I mean is that you
know everything off the diagonal of this
matrix all of those entries there are
going to be zeros and so what is
possible to show and we'll go improve
this here but it turns out that for a
given value of K this quantity over here
can be computed much more simply and
that quantity compute can be computed as
1 minus sum from I equals 1 to K of SII
divided by sum from I equals 1 through n
of s III so just to say that inwards so
just to take another view of how to
explain that if K equals 3 let's say
what we're going to do to compute the
numerator it's tan from 1 R equals 1
through 3 of S is you just compute the
sum of these first three elements so
that's the numerator and then for the
denominator well that's the sum of all
of these diagonal entries and 1 minus
the ratio of that that gives me this
quantity over here the circle thank you
and so what we can do is just test that
this is less than or equal to open
one or equivalently we can test if you
know something I equals 1 through K si R
/ central I equals 1 through n SII if
this is greater than or equal to 0.99 if
you want to make sure that 99% of the
variance is retained and so what you can
do is just slowly increase K you know
set K equals 1 so k equals 2 second
equals 3 and so on and just test this
quantity to see what is the smallest
value of K that ensures that 99% of the
variance is retained and if you do this
then you need to call the SVD function
only once because that gives you the S
matrix and once you have the S matrix
you can then yeah just keep on doing
this calculation by increasing the value
of K in the numerator and so you don't
need to keep on calling SVD over and
over again to test out different values
of K so this procedure is much more
efficient and this can allow you to
select the value of K without needing to
run PCA from scratch over and over you
just run SVD once this gives you all of
these diagonal numbers all of these
numbers s 1 1 s 2 2 Delta s n n and then
you can just you know very K in this
expression to find the smallest value of
K so the 99% of the variance is retained
so to summarize the way that I often use
the way that I often choose K when I'm
using PCA for compression is I would
call SBT once and the covariance matrix
and then I will use this formula and
pick the value of smallest value of K
for which this expression is satisfied
and by the way even if you were to pick
some different value of K even we were
to pick the value of K manually you know
maybe have a thousand dimensional data
and I just want to choose K equals 100
then if you want to explain to others
what you just did a good way to explain
the performance of your implementation
of PCA to them is actually to take this
quantity and compute what this is and
that will tell you what was the
percentage of variance
and if you report that number then you
know people that are familiar with PTA
or people can use this to try to get a
good understanding of how well your
hundred dimensional representation is
approximating your original data set
because it's 99% of variants rotate
that's really a measure of your square
reconstruction error you know that ratio
of being at most 0.01 this gives people
a good intuitive sense of whether your
implementation of PCA is finding a good
approximation of your original data set
so hopefully that gives you an efficient
procedure for choosing the number K for
choosing what dimension to reduce your
data to and if you apply PCA it's a very
high dimensional data set you know so
like a thousand dimensional data very
often just because data sets tend to
have highly correlated features just as
a property or most of the data says you
see you often find that PCA will be able
to retain 99% of the variance or attain
95-99 some high fraction of the variance
even while compressing the data there by
a very large factor